SPHINX IMPLEMENTATION PROPOSAL (SIP-0001)

Summary
As quantum computing technology continues to advance, the cryptographic systems that underpin our digital security are at risk. Current signature schemes based on discrete logarithms, such as ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm), and prime integers like RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman), are vulnerable to quantum attacks due to the potential of algorithms like Shor's algorithm, which can efficiently factor large numbers and compute discrete logarithms. This vulnerability poses a significant threat to data integrity and security across various applications, including financial transactions, secure communications, and digital identities. As a result, there is an urgent need to transition to post-quantum cryptographic schemes, such as SPHINCS+, which are designed to withstand quantum attacks and ensure the future security of digital signatures.

SPHINCS+
the world's first "stateless" digital signature scheme, having won the NIST signature scheme competition  https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/fips/205/ipd for post-quantum cryptography. In contrast, XMSS is a "stateful" digital signature scheme. Understanding the differences between these two types of digital signatures is essential for evaluating their operational characteristics and security implications.

Stateless Digital Signatures
Definition: Stateless digital signature schemes do not require the signer to maintain any internal state between the creation of multiple signatures. Each signature can be generated independently using the same signing key without the risk of compromising previous signatures.

How Stateless Signatures Work:
1. Key Generation: A private-public key pair is generated.
2. Signing: To sign a message, the signer uses the private key along with a cryptographic algorithm to produce a signature.
3. Verification: The verifier uses the public key to verify the signature against the message.
4. The signer can use the same private key for multiple signatures without maintaining any record of previously signed messages. While stateless signatures are easy to implement and use, they may be vulnerable to future quantum attacks.

Stateful Digital Signatures
1. Definition: Stateful digital signature schemes require the signer to keep track of the state of the signing process. This means the signer must carefully manage which keys or elements have been used for signing to ensure security.
Example: XMSS (eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme).

How Stateful Signatures Work:
1. Key Generation: A key pair is generated along with a state variable that tracks usage.
2. Signing: Each signature updates the state, and the signer must ensure that no key or component is reused inappropriately.
3. Verification: The verifier checks the signature against the message using the public key.

Differences in Operation
1. State Management:
Stateless: No internal state needs to be maintained; the same key can be used repeatedly without additional bookkeeping.
Stateful: The signer must track which keys or elements have been used. Failing to update the state can introduce vulnerabilities.

2. Security Model:
- Stateless:
SPHINCS+ is designed to be secure against quantum attacks, making it a unique and innovative solution in the digital signature landscape. It utilizes a combination of One-Time Signatures (OTS) and Hash-Based Signatures (HBS) to achieve its security. In SPHINCS+, OTS is employed for signing individual messages, ensuring that each signature is unique and independent. The use of HBS enhances the overall robustness of the scheme by allowing for a high degree of flexibility and adaptability while maintaining security against quantum threats. The stateless nature of SPHINCS+ means that it does not require the signer to keep track of any internal state, which simplifies implementation and reduces the risk of vulnerabilities associated with state management.

- Stateful: In contrast, many stateful schemes, such as XMSS (eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme), also aim to provide post-quantum security but require careful management of state throughout the signing process. These schemes maintain an internal state variable that tracks which keys or elements have been used for signing, making them more complex and prone to vulnerabilities if the state is not managed properly. While these stateful schemes are designed to be secure against quantum attacks, they inherently require more diligence in their implementation and usage compared to stateless schemes like SPHINCS+.

3. Key Reuse:
- Stateless: The same key can be reused indefinitely without issue.
- Stateful: Elements of the private key must not be reused; doing so can lead to signature forgery.

4. Complexity:
- Stateless: Simple to implement and manage due to the lack of state tracking.
- Stateful: More complex because of the need for meticulous state management and key tracking.


Conclusion
Stateless digital signatures, like SPHINCS+, offer ease of use and implementation without state maintenance, whereas stateful signatures, like XMSS, provide a robust framework for security but require careful management of state and keys. Understanding these distinctions is crucial for selecting the appropriate digital signature scheme based on security requirements and operational complexity.
